Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. My name is Elena Konstantinovna Panteleeva, and I am a lecturer at the Marketing Department at the School of Economics.
I deal with issues and problems such as the international marketing and branding of companies in the foreign market. I have experience teaching at business schools such as the School of Management, the School of Marketing and Business Development, and I also deal with consulting.
The topic of our conversation today is international marketing. Japanese wisdom says, if I am negotiating with you, I will speak your language. If I buy goods from you, you must speak my language.
In fact, this Japanese wisdom reflects the philosophy of international marketing. It is very difficult to understand and satisfy the needs of foreign consumers, especially if we are not sure what the needs are.
We will have to find out what the needs are or create something that will be interesting to foreign consumers.
If we recall companies such as Sony, Coca-Cola, Nestle, and a huge number of other well-known companies that represent their products in a huge number of markets, they somehow learned to speak the same language as foreign consumers.
Therefore, the central question of our conversation today is whether Russian companies can learn to speak the same language as foreign consumers and achieve real success in the global market.
Today, we cannot talk seriously about the long-term life of a business if it is focused solely on the domestic market. Or let's talk about a situation when a company is very successful in the domestic market, but is not present in the global market.
What can help us win foreign markets? The experience of winning regions is of great importance. Russian companies are in a winning situation because they are forced to face new rules of the game and new consumers.
In this sense, success in the regional markets may not be the main reason for success in the international markets.
Let's be honest. Winning international markets is a very difficult task. It will require a lot of effort and a lot of costs from your company.
If all this is done properly, the costs and efforts will be paid off. According to the Small Business Development Corporation, the productivity of exporting firms is 20% higher than that of firms focused solely on the domestic market.
At the same time, the probability of bankruptcy of exporters is 9% lower than that of firms that do not export. And finally, exporting firms usually react much faster to changes in the market economy.
All this leads us to what we will be doing today. Our main questions will be the following. We will try to understand the motives and risks of a company's exit to the foreign market.
The next aspect we will consider is the stages of the company's involvement in international business. I would also like to share a very useful thing with you.
This is the experience of companies from countries with developing economies, the so-called emerging markets, and the comparison of problems and opportunities for international expansion of these companies and Russian companies.
And then we will move on to the more instrumental part. We will see how to choose markets for international expansion, how to compare possible models of exit to the foreign market, and finally, how to formulate and implement the choice of international marketing strategy. Let's start with the content of our course.
There's probably an interesting thing out there.
The first step is to learn the high science on your own market, then you can look at the international market.
In the traditional logic, companies start by trying to keep the consumer.
They increase the degree of keeping the customer.
This is the first step.
Then you will move to increase the share of the company in consumer expenses.
If you succeed, you will move to the next level of attracting new consumers.
I urge you not to forget that each previous step is the basis for the next one.
This is where the money flows are generated, which will allow you to finance the growth along this ladder.
We move on.
The development of new goods and services, the exit to new markets, but we are still talking about the domestic market.
These can be new segments.
The next step is new channels of goods and services.
And finally, what we are talking about.
International growth.
When all the opportunities of the domestic market are exhausted, you start looking for further growth outside the domestic market.
This is the traditional logic.
The question is, how do you think, is it possible to jump out of this logic and become successful in foreign markets without trying to create strong positions in the domestic market?
Let's look at the trends that affect international business and will help us to answer the question I just raised.
Let's see what these trends are.
The first trend that everyone is talking about, both practitioners and people with academic careers, is the strengthening of globalization and regionalization processes.
We hear a lot about the strengthening of globalization processes.
But this is due to the rapid development of information and communication technologies.
If we look at the development of the economy, we should talk about regionalization processes.
Many studies show that if we analyze the statistics of foreign trade, the strengthening of trade processes is not happening on a global scale, but within certain regions.
I deliberately give two interpretations here.
Globalization and regionalization processes.
But how interesting can this be from the point of view of Russian companies?
What else are we dealing with in the framework of this process?
The first thing we see is the reduction of barriers to international activity.
What is called trade liberalization.
But on the one hand, there is a serious reduction in market protection.
And yet, there is a very serious influence of non-tariff barriers.
On the one hand, this simplifies the implementation of business operations.
On the other hand, such a serious simplification of activity in foreign markets does not give us this yet.
The next aspect of this globalization process is expressed in the strengthening of competition.
Because we are now seeing a colossal flow of new players from developing countries.
Even if you look at the data, almost all media are talking about companies from BRIC countries.
The first letters are Brazil, Russia, India, China.
And this is the new force that we have to reckon with.
And finally, the third important aspect is the change in consumer expectations.
After all, the consumer in almost every country in the world already has a huge choice.
And he can choose from local products, products of regional manufacturers and global manufacturers.
And, accordingly, his appetites are increasing.
He already has the opportunity to compare what his companies, local companies and international companies offer him.
And all this leads to the fact that if you are not able to exceed, I emphasize, not even satisfy, but exceed the expectations of foreign consumers,
it will be quite difficult for you to win in the competitive struggle of international companies.
Our next trend is the rapid development of information and communication technologies.
What does it give us? What is it interesting about?
The first, certainly interesting thing is the emergence of the intranet.
What do I mean here?
For us, for Russian companies in particular, it gives the opportunity for easier communication within the company.
Which, in turn, will allow us to accelerate the process of, say, the development of new goods, exchange of ideas, etc.
And the like, which will ultimately lead to a faster commercialization of your ideas, your goods.
And the world is now more and more subject to the word speed.
And this should be taken into account.
The next aspect is the internet, of course.
And what does the internet give companies to conquer international markets?
In fact, it gives direct access to the consumer on any market, whether it is Brazil, whether it is Russia, whether it is India or any other country where the internet is already, let's say, sufficiently developed.
The next aspect is the change in the nature of marketing.
Yes, it is largely due to the emergence of these very new technologies.
And, accordingly, for companies that belong to the so-called new industries, these are industries that are based on information and knowledge.
For such companies, the nature of marketing has changed due to the fact that you have direct access to your end consumer.
And you no longer need intermediaries.
On the other hand, if we look at traditional industries, in this case, I mean industries where there is a established technology.
What is more typical for these industries?
In this situation, it is more typical for the gradual transfer of production to less developed countries.
At the same time, prices are falling, the margin is shrinking.
The next trend we should mention is the emergence of the knowledge economy.
That is, everything related to the growth of spending on neocor, the reduction of the life cycle of goods.
This is what requires companies to be constantly on the wave of innovations that are happening in business.
In that case, if you do not keep up with what is happening in business, this wave washes you away.
And finally, the emergence of new organizational forms, such as network forms of inter-company cooperation, virtual enterprises, clusters.
All this significantly facilitates the process of exchange of ideas, experience, and so on, which ultimately allows you to reduce your costs and accelerate the pace of commercialization of goods.
Now let's talk about what makes companies move to the international market.
There are some motives that are an active aspiration of companies, and there are so-called reactive motives.
This is actually what forces companies to move to the foreign market.
The most common active motive is the desire to increase profits and growth rates.
It should be said that 88% of new companies are companies from countries with developing economies with revenues of more than a billion dollars.
88% of these companies say that they go to the international market to gain growth and increase profits.
But for us, perhaps, another motive is more relevant.
It may seem strange, but if the ambitions of your company's managers are high enough, this is a significant step towards success in the international market.
In general, probably, in any market. If you are confident, if you know that your product or service is really high quality, you can interest anyone with this product or service.
The next active motive is the presence of technological competencies or a unique product.
Here I would like to say a few words about Abbe.
Probably, you are all well aware of such a product as FineReader.
Indeed, this is the product with which the company has managed to conquer the international market.
This is a software product that allows you to recognize texts.
The company is selling this product successfully in the foreign markets, but it does not stop at what it has achieved.
Now it is actively trying to use the opportunity that has arisen in the foreign markets.
In connection with the well-known geopolitical factors, Arab countries are now getting significant attention and interest.
Nevertheless, there is still no software product that would allow you to reliably recognize Arab connections.
The company is now actively working on this.
This smoothly leads us to the next active motive, which is the use of opportunities in the international markets.
Here is another good example.
Russian food companies, such as Karkunov, Ochakov, etc., used a simple opportunity.
This is the service of the immigrant segment, the use of the most nostalgic motives, which are quite typical for this environment,
and the penetration into even developed and very serious competitive markets, such as the United States of America, Germany, Israel, etc.
The next active motive is the saving of the scale.
This allows you to reduce production costs, so you can set lower prices and feel completely calm in the competition,
if price competition begins in the markets.
Finally, there is the motive of tax benefits, state stimulus for export, but this is a motive that is not always used.
If we look at the reactive motives, the most unpleasant is the small size or saturation of the domestic market.
For Russian companies, the near future may not be easy, because according to demographic data, by 2050, the population of Russia will be reduced by a third,
which means that the domestic market will shrink, so companies can look for opportunities in foreign markets.
For example, a company that was based on this logic in the foreign market is Mir, which produces park rides.
In the early 1990s, they faced the fact that state orders in this area ceased, and the domestic Russian market began to shrink.
The company was forced to look for opportunities abroad.
They began to visit various exhibitions and see what competitors offer there.
It turned out that competitors bring catalogs with samples of their products.
What could the Russian company offer in the market, which is a monopoly and the entry to which was very difficult?
The Russian company, as we are used to, played at the price.
The fact is that Russian products were about twice cheaper than foreign analogues.
At the same time, Russian specialists offered a unique opportunity to look at the samples.
This gave potential customers the opportunity to come to Russia and try the construction of these rides on the spot,
some additional opportunities, and so on.
In fact, the company managed to penetrate both the European and Asian markets.
The next asset is the pressure of competitors.
Yes, there are situations when the competition in the domestic market is so strong that companies notice that the working conditions are becoming more and more difficult,
that profits are falling, and in this situation companies begin to think about where there may be more opportunities to make profits.
Therefore, sometimes Turkish companies leave their market for even more competitive markets, in particular Germany,
but there are more opportunities to make profits there.
The next asset is the availability of excess production capacities.
If you have excess capacity or resources in the domestic market, it will be very beneficial for you to load these capacities,
let's call it export volume, and then sell this product in foreign markets.
Another reactive motive is the pursuit of traditional consumers.
In fact, this is perhaps the most common thing for companies operating in the B2B sphere.
In this situation, if you are a supplier of Ford, Ford is represented in a huge number of markets,
and you are actually following Ford on the international market like a thread behind a needle.
The next reactive motive is accidental export orders.
Perhaps this is a fairly traditional thing for Russian companies in the early 1990s,
when our companies were really striving for foreign markets, but still did not quite understand where, how and why.
And by receiving such once-off orders, they had the opportunity to gain access to the international market.
So far, let's call it unconscious, not direct, but indirect.
Nevertheless, in the early 1990s, Metal Park received an order from a South Korean businessman to manufacture golf clubs.
Moreover, the company had competencies in the field of processing such metals as, in particular, titanium.
These heads were made of titanium, and such a once-off batch of export orders was made.
After that, the company gained access to a very rich and attractive golf equipment market for some time.
And finally, another reactive motive is the desire to expand the sale of seasonal goods.
Of course, the world and, accordingly, the climate offer us opportunities associated with a very high fluctuation of temperatures, pressures, and so on.
And this can become an additional opportunity for your product.
Let's say you are a manufacturer of windsurfing equipment.
It is clear that if you are a Norwegian manufacturer, then the season in your cold seas will most likely be quite short.
And therefore, it is quite logical for such a company to look at, say, southern countries, where the season for windsurfing can be significantly extended.
Everything would seem very beautiful, and there are serious reasons to move to the foreign market.
But, alas, we must always remember that every coin has a flip side, and this side is the risk side.
Let's see what types of risks exist.
We will divide them into four groups.
The first is economic risk.
The second is political risk.
The third is behavioral risk.
And finally, the fourth group is technological risk.
Let's try to get a little bit into the essence of these types of risks.
Let's start with the first group, economic risk.
Of course, we all understand that the problem can be an economic and financial situation in the world.
What is this connected with?
Of course, this is connected with the fact that the influence of negative processes can affect the purchasing power of consumers, and, of course, this will affect your sales.
Also, a negative situation in the currency markets can greatly affect the competitiveness of foreign goods on the local markets.
In particular, we saw this in 1998, when almost immediately foreign goods became unrivaled in price on our market.
And, accordingly, this should be taken into account by companies that are striving for foreign markets.
Another type of risk here is tariff and non-tariff barriers.
As we have already said, the tariff protection of many markets has already been significantly reduced.
But, unfortunately, the non-tariff protection of markets is increasing.
Moreover, for Russian companies, this is just a bitch, because Russia is one of the ten countries that face the largest number of such barriers.
As you understand, China is the first place here.
Nevertheless, Russia and Russian companies lose a lot on this.
Let's see how these mechanisms can weaken the competitiveness of your products.
I want to give you an example of what happened to Japanese video tape recorders in France.
The fact is that Japanese and French video tape recorders were on the French market in about the same price category.
The quality was not very different.
But the French government decided to protect the local manufacturer.
What was done?
In the past, Japanese video tape recorders were shipped to the French market by sea, which is a relatively cheap means of transportation.
Then they were shipped to French ports, and then by car or railway transport to different parts of the country.
What was done?
Customs terminals were moved inland, and the nearest customs terminal was about 100 miles from the port.
What happens in this situation?
The manufacturer has an additional cost of transportation, which is related to the movement of cargo from the port to the customs terminal.
As a result, the final prices for Japanese video tape recorders have increased, and consumers are paying more and more attention to their own French video tape recorders.
As you can see, this is a very dangerous tool in the hands of governments of different countries, and we cannot influence it.
The next aspects of economic risks are related to strong competition on international markets, and the need to adapt products to international market demands.
This will increase the final price of your products and make them less competitive.
The next block of risks is political risks. Companies have to face a lot of problems because this is a situation that you cannot influence, or your influence is very limited.
What are we talking about? Political instability, which can be very dangerous if you invest in a market. You are at risk of not getting your investments back.
Another very unpleasant aspect is bureaucratic barriers and corruption, because this can become an additional burden for you.
Hong Kong companies have an interesting statistic. They say that when they start a business project in Russia, about 10-15% of the cost of the project goes to the account.
In China, this amount is about 5%, and in Indonesia, such numbers can be up to 30%.
What else is bad? If this is not an additional financial burden for you, then it is possible that these bureaucratic barriers will lead to your investment projects taking up more time than you expected.
This is also a delay in entering the foreign market.
Now let's pay attention to behavioral risks. This is something you can control to a large extent, because it checks your skills, your skills as a marketer, as a foreign consumer.
What should we pay attention to? Of course, cultural and linguistic differences.
All companies understand that when transferring their products to another cultural and linguistic environment, you must be extremely careful.
But even such large companies as McDonald's or Coca-Cola sometimes forget about this and make mistakes.
In particular, such a mistake was made by these companies when they conquered the Middle East. In Saudi Arabia, McDonald's and Coca-Cola put the flag of Saudi Arabia on their packaging and put a phrase from the Koran on the back of the flag.
But one very significant cultural feature was not taken into account. The fact is that in Islam it is forbidden to tear holy letters, but you put these holy letters on the packaging, which is not intended to be stored.
Accordingly, the consumer simply did not buy the product that was packed in this way.
Another problem that companies face, which did not pay enough attention to this, is linguistic problems.
The most problematic points are the name of your brand and all advertising slogans and advertising materials.
The strangest example is the Australian airline, which, entering the Hong Kong market, decided not to adapt its name to a foreign language environment.
The company's management was surprised that no one wanted to buy tickets for this airline, and, accordingly, the company incurred losses.
What was the matter? The fact was that in this very linguistic environment, the brand of the company sounded like a dead world. As you understand, it was a very bad advertising for an airline.
Another peculiar example was related to advertising campaigns. This advertising was hanging in the Copenhagen airport for a long time.
In Russian, it sounded like this. We will take your luggage and send it in any direction. This did not please the consumer, because he was wondering where and when he would see his luggage in the next country in the world.
Therefore, companies need to be extremely careful. I repeat, this is your task, the task of marketers.
The next task of marketers, and the risk associated with this, is the misunderstanding of the preferences of foreign consumers. In particular, in America, the classic marketing mistake is still considered by European cars, such as Mercedes.
The fact is that when these cars first began to enter the American market, they did not contain a very important, but necessary for Americans detail, namely, cup holders. It would seem a trifle, but a trifle is very important.
Finally, there is also a risk associated with a misunderstanding of the culture of business in other countries. Of course, this will be fundamentally important for you at the stage of negotiating.
It is advisable to study the approaches and requirements for these features of the culture of business in other countries before negotiating with representatives of other countries.
The next type of risk is technological risks. We see that companies like Sony and Microsoft are constantly trying to fight technological piracy, of course, because they are short of significant income due to the influence of this factor.
But on the other hand, we have to remember that in the case when software does not work as it should, in these cases, the consumer often transfers all his negative feelings to the company's production.
And thus it negatively affects the image of the brand. Therefore, technological piracy is a very serious risk, and companies operating in international markets are constantly trying to fight this phenomenon.
The next technological risk is the underdevelopment of infrastructure. Here is a curious example of a company called Lever Brasus, which in India and Pakistan, in addition to countries with a hot climate, but at the same time not at the highest level of development,
they faced the fact that by supplying their frozen products to these markets, such as various vegetable, berry and other mixes, they could not bring these frozen mixtures to the end consumer in the most ideal form.
Why? Because, unfortunately, the wholesale retail system of these countries was poorly equipped with refrigerators, and therefore the products in this hot climate simply were not preserved.
And so the company had to spend quite a lot of money to develop a new type of products for these markets, which were already dehydrated products that could be preserved in this hot climate for as long as possible.
And now I would like to offer you a small task. Try to make a list of risks that your company will face when it enters the foreign market. And try to arrange them in terms of significance.
In fact, this is a very useful task before entering the foreign market, so that you can understand where problems may arise. At least for some of them, you will prepare in this way.
The next aspect that I would like to draw your attention to is how companies work in international markets, what strategies they use. And I suggest you pay attention to the slide of international business strategies.
Here, in this matrix, as you can see, there are four types of strategies. Snail strategy, multilocal strategy, transnational strategy, and global strategy. How did we divide them into cells in this matrix?
On the one hand, we take into account the degree of global integration, and on the other hand, we take into account the sensitivity of the company to the conditions of the local market. And based on these two components, we can determine which strategy is more difficult for a particular company.
Let's pay attention to the first type of strategy, the snail strategy. What happens in this case? In this case, the company relies entirely on its core competencies, which were developed for and for its local market.
And these competencies serve as a weapon, a competitive tool in international markets. An example here is a cement industry, a company that operates in this logic. They are like a snail, pulling this house behind them to other foreign markets.
The next type of strategy differs from the first one in that you begin to react very clearly to the conditions of foreign markets. You begin to understand that each international market is unique, and accordingly, marketing strategies are developed for each market.
The main source of competitive advantage is adaptation to the conditions of the local market. On the one hand, this is very good, because you satisfy the requirements of foreign consumers to the fullest.
On the other hand, the costs are increasing enormously. And another unpleasant aspect is the loss of coordination between the markets, between the activities of the companies that are carried out in a number of foreign markets.
What companies follow this logic? Ten years ago, I would say that Unilever follows this strategy. Now we will see that the company is already migrating towards a transnational strategy.
If we look at who still follows this logic, we can probably name Heinz, which still tries to adapt its products to the conditions of local markets.
In this case, you get benefits from efficiency on a global scale, but at the same time you keep your attention to local features.
This is what the Unilever strategy describes. It uses features on local markets, taking into account the changes in tastes that contribute to the adoption of products on foreign markets.
The price varies, the communication varies, but the basis is a certain concept that allows the company to be accessible and, most importantly, to reduce its costs.
It should also be noted that such behavior of companies on international markets gave rise to the term globalization and localization. This is a situation where you strive to combine seemingly impossible things.
And finally, the global strategy, when you refuse to take into account the differences between markets. You say that the basis of your competitive advantage is efficiency on a global scale.
You adjust your activity on international markets to offer the consumer a standardized product at acceptable prices, but the basis is a single concept, a single positioning.
This increases your recognition on global and international markets, and on the other hand, it allows you to be more effective. In particular, such companies as Ikea or Body Shop are a good example.
Now let's try to figure out which ways lead to the global market, what opportunities companies have. The first opportunity is the possibility of gradual, consistent entry into the global market.
Of course, this is a long-term strategy, and it often takes years or even decades.
In the past, when there was no Internet, information and communication technologies were not so developed, such companies as Kodak, Ford, Nestle, Unilever, and so on, these companies spent years and years to conquer the global market.
Now we see that such a consistent path is more typical for companies operating in traditional industries. Companies operating in so-called new industries are more typical for them in the second way, which is to jump into the global market.
These companies can become global players very quickly, and such an entry into the international market and the conquest of strong positions takes a very short time, up to three years, sometimes even six months.
This is a phenomenon that has been called born global in recent years.
This can be the formation of networks or clusters that will allow you to enter the global market using each other's resources gradually, but still much faster than in the first case.
This option can be quite fast if you can find an interesting large manufacturer that wants to get your product as a component of its final product.
And you can prove this with quality, and stable quality. Not only high, but also stable.
Let's now try to look at these three options of entering the global market in a little more detail.
So, the first option is to enter the global market, this is the longest path, and this path traditionally goes through a number of stages.
The first stage is the preparatory stage, when your company may not have any export activity at all, you are solely focused on the domestic market.
But in this situation, you can already start considering the opportunities of entering the foreign market, assessing these opportunities and gaining experience.
At this stage, companies receive the most experience from possible partners, but on the domestic market.
What do I mean? You can carry out import activities, or you can create joint enterprises, but for now on your domestic market.
So, for now, we are focusing on the domestic market.
An example of a company that has been at this stage for a long time is the Taiwanese computer company Acer.
The company was founded in 1976, but I must say that before the early 1980s, they did not have their own product at all.
The company was exclusively engaged in distribution and was a distributor of such companies as Texas Instruments.
But I repeat, they did not have a product, but there was a great desire to become a company that was present on the international markets.
And when the product appeared, the company began to actively enter the global market.
The second stage is the initial entry into the market.
In fact, you are still maintaining your orientation to the domestic market.
It is about the fact that the share of export in your operations is up to 10% of the total sales volume.
But at this stage, you are already gradually expanding the volume of export, and maybe as one of the steps you will take to create your own trading company abroad.
In fact, at this stage, you are starting to create outposts on foreign markets, or maybe on one foreign market.
The next stage is the expansion of the local market.
Here you are actually pushing a local market to which you have entered at the previous step.
At the same time, a marketing strategy is already being developed for this market.
At this stage, companies often resort to making direct foreign investments.
This can be, say, buying assets abroad.
In particular, we saw a similar picture in 1994, when Unilever, which was present on the Russian market only through export, purchased the North Light factory and began to produce Sansilk shampoo there.
Now, as you probably know, this factory produces both deodorants and washing liquids, and so on.
That is, the company is already actively expanding the local market.
And finally, the fourth stage is global rationalization.
At this stage, companies are already moving from national orientation to global orientation.
What does this mean?
This means that you coordinate and integrate your activity in the countries where you entered at the previous stages.
This allows you to solve the problems that may have arisen at the previous stage.
The problems we talked about are duplication of efforts, significant increase in costs.
At this stage of global rationalization, you try to balance all this so that you can achieve efficiency on a global scale.
Companies like Ford have already successfully reached this stage and are carrying out their activities in coordination with their international operations.
In particular, one of the elements that Ford uses is the so-called Ford Performance Center.
It is quite curious that the company has placed a number of such centers that bring together engineers, designers,
who develop certain common standards, common designs, which are later used as a standard, a standard,
or a basis on which some changes can be made, some adaptation to the local market.
But the basis is a certain standard, let's agree on the standard of these solutions.
The next type of our global market is a phenomenon born globally.
What is it? These are companies that can become players on the global market almost instantly.
At the same time, if we saw that in the previous situation companies go through a number of successive stages,
then these companies become global, often jumping over some stages.
And I must say that these companies do not start with the fact that they win strong positions on the domestic market.
They are directly oriented to the global market.
This is actually what is embedded in the name of this phenomenon, born globally.
What companies can we call the typical representatives of this class of companies?
First of all, these are companies in the high-tech sphere.
Companies like Stone Soft, F-Secure are Finnish companies born globally,
who in a very short period of time, from about a year to three, managed to win very serious positions on the global market.
Moreover, the coverage of international markets of these companies is about 80 countries.
So, we can say that they are globally present.
Another example is Amazon, which managed to become globally present quite quickly.
But there is also a slightly different type of companies, typical representatives, these are so-called craftsmen.
Here we can give an example of Scottish companies, which specialize in the production of jewelry using Celtic design,
or, say, the design of the very popular, probably the most famous Scottish designer-architect Charles McIntosh.
As it turned out, this is a very popular niche.
What we should talk about next is probably the most key approach or specifics of this type of companies.
It is always a narrow specialization, it is always a niche, and it is a focused approach to business.
Moreover, if we talk about high-tech companies, then here is their very good ability to recognize technological capabilities and use them.
In particular, the companies I told you about, Stone Soft, F-Secure, are software companies that have developed products,
they are mainly connected with computer security, which have become very interesting for large companies,
which are already actively present in the international markets.
In particular, we are already starting to talk about how these very global ones penetrate the global market.
So, our first access channel is close communication with large companies, which can act as, for example, system integrators or distributors of products born globally.
Another access channel of products born globally on the international market is the use of various associations, networks.
In this situation, several independent companies are united in such a network and have a common goal, for example, the goal of conquering the global market.
They share resources and thus try to achieve the most cherished synergetic effect.
When we have 1 plus 1 is equal to 3.
And finally, the Internet is probably the most understandable access channel for the global market, which Amazon used brilliantly.
Thus, having the opportunity to reach out, to serve consumers in almost any corner of the world.
And finally, another model, another opportunity for access to the global market.
And these are already various opportunities for using virtualization of business.
Let's see what are the possibilities and models involved here.
The first model is the model of a remote global partnership.
What does it represent?
It is a situation when several companies share resources to create new products, processes, and what else can you imagine.
At the same time, they work in close communication with each other.
And so, at the output, you get a desired product.
In particular, we can say that such a scheme or such a logic was used to form a partnership between IBM, Sun, and Hewlett-Packard to create a language of YALA.
The second model is the core and satellites.
What does this model already imply?
In the first case, we saw that we are talking about independent companies.
Here, we are still talking about independent companies, legally.
But these companies are united.
Due to the fact that there is a focal firm, a core.
And this core interacts with organizations that support its activities.
In particular, we can say that advertising agencies, suppliers, wholesalers, retail traders can act as such supportive organizations.
Nevertheless, we all focus on this focal firm.
In particular, this is how, for example, Ford and its suppliers around the world work.
The third type of organization, the third model, is a virtual value chain.
What is this model?
Here we see that a coordinated set of transactions is carried out between companies that serve end consumers,
and it does not matter in which country in the world,
using information technology and supporting the development of a product or service for end consumers.
Let's recall what a sound recording product is.
How is it created?
If we look at the real world,
what do companies need to create this real product,
which the consumer will eventually receive as a CD or audio cassette with the recordings of their favorite artists?
In this case, in the physical world, the company will have to find this artist,
record him, arrange the work, create a master tape,
and distribute this product.
The promotion of this product will also be our function.
Now let's recall the situation.
What or how does the Internet transform this type of business?
In fact, today any artist has the opportunity to record his great work and post it on the Internet.
And then he will see how much his work will interest the public.
But companies do not want to lose such a profitable business as sound recording.
And so, in particular, a company like Geffen Records,
having caught this trend, decided that they should create a virtual chain of values.
How has this business transformed?
It has transformed due to the fact that you are still looking for some artists in the real world.
Although, by the way, you can find these artists on the Internet.
It doesn't matter.
Then they have a website, which they use as a platform for testing consumer reaction.
Accordingly, any consumer, when he or she enters this page,
can listen to some artist or a group,
assess how much he or she is interested in this or not.
And then on the same site, he or she can see when and where this group will perform,
if, of course, the consumer is interested.
Also, through this site, he or she can order a physical product
or download this or that music to their computer.
So, what are we talking about?
About the fact that the chain of values has become virtual.
The next model is an integrated company.
In this case, a group of companies works as a single, vertically integrated company,
which produces certain goods or services.
Here, for example, can be a company called ConElevators.
This is a Finnish elevator manufacturer.
They integrate the activities of their branches around the world in this way,
which allows them to exchange ideas about new products,
about the opinion of consumers about their products,
technical characteristics, discuss, and so on.
And finally, the fifth model is an electronic market.
This is a system where individual companies work in this very system of the electronic market,
which implies the use of technology exclusively as a means of interaction with the end consumer.
Let's take Amazon, which interacts with its suppliers and consumers around the world.
Let's take the same electronic newspapers on the Internet.
Or let's take a less well-known example, the company Feonichek.com.
This is an American company that was established in the 1950s.
It was a small family business in the production of standard furniture.
They had their warehouses, but the business was, let's say, modest.
But with the advent of the Internet, the company decided to pay attention to the opportunities that had opened up.
And what did they do?
They created a studio in which they create various furniture options.
They shoot, and then they exhibit various furniture combinations on their website.
The second aspect is that they have a relationship with suppliers who are able to deliver products to the end consumer on their own.
And they offer products of any class, from standard furniture to Ampere-style furniture.
At the same time, what does the company do?
The company is engaged in brokerage.
And they say that they are not engaged in a furniture business as such.
They are engaged in marrying the consumer to individual and ideal furniture.
The Russian market
Now let's move on to our companies, to the Russian companies.
Why do you think that we still know very few examples of successful Russian companies entering the foreign market?
There are many arguments, the most common of which is the following.
The first is that the Russian market is limitless.
There are a lot of opportunities here.
And, accordingly, companies can feel at home in the Russian market for many years.
But, again, returning to the warnings of demographers, we remember that the population of Russia is shrinking.
And, what is even worse, the population of Russia is aging.
And, in general, we must, again, state that this will probably be due to the fact that the purchasing power of the population will decrease, and the domestic market will shrink.
The second argument, why it is not worth considering the Russian market as such a rubber market,
is because the competition in this market is still increasing, and there is really less and less niche where you can win leadership positions.
The second typical argument is that the foreign markets are so competitive, mature, structured, that it is simply dangerous to go there.
But I will not even say that the code of these markets can be broken.
I want to draw your attention to the fact that we should not forget that there are dynamic and developing markets,
such as China and India, where you can find your consumer, which is what Russian companies such as Baltic or Siberian Berks are trying to do.
And, finally, another argument that, unfortunately, sounds very sad, is that Russian companies have nothing to do with the foreign market.
We just really do not have competitive advantages.
This argument can also be argued. Yes, there are certainly problems, but let's say that the Russian product can be a source of new feelings for foreign consumers.
And then, even if we try to understand what Russian products are in the eyes of foreign consumers,
then, in general, we very often remember such brands as Kalashnikov, Bolshoi Theater, vodka.
It is difficult to talk about a specific brand, although, perhaps, a Western consumer perceives vodka as a brand of the capital.
And so on. In general, a good product, high-quality, and therefore we can quite expect that a foreign consumer, if you can convince him of this, will be happy to buy Russian products.
Plus, there are still some opportunities for using affordable and sometimes, in comparison with the positions of foreign competitors, cheap resources.
And this should not be forgotten.
Now let's try to think about how to penetrate the global markets of Russian companies.
And here, probably, a very good support is the strategic models of globalization, which are used by companies from countries with developing markets, such as China, Brazil, India, and so on.
What approaches do these companies use and what do they achieve?
The first strategy is to bring domestic food lines and brands to the global market.
There is a clear prerequisite here. And the prerequisite is strong positions in the domestic market.
At the same time, your international expansion will be based on the fact that you bring products that are either understandable to the consumer, that is, they have a wide recognition, or they are simply enough to adapt to the new markets.
At the same time, such companies that follow this strategy are quite actively using deliveries for so-called private brands, that is, for brands of retail networks, and for OEMs.
What is OEM? These are deliveries for the brand of a well-known manufacturer.
Here you can pay attention to such a company as Koch Holding. This is the largest Turkish holding.
In particular, one of its branches, Archelik, which deals with white and brown technology production, began to actively penetrate the foreign markets in the 1980s.
And in fact, they used the strategy of so-called organic growth, when gradually, slowly, trade representatives opened up in different countries.
These were England, Germany, France. As you understand, the markets are really serious, structured, and highly competitive.
Since we are talking about white technology, we immediately remember the Siemens company, Bosch Siemens. We are talking about Merlon, Electrolux, and other well-known companies.
These are really complex markets. But at the same time, the companies have managed to win significant positions in these markets. In particular, in the UK, they have gradually won a share of 14% in the refrigerator market.
At the same time, they still manage to hold leading positions in their domestic market. They occupy about 50% of the market.
What else is very important for these companies is that in developed markets they strive to position their products as a worthy alternative to well-known brands.
What is the reason? A good price-quality ratio. Moreover, we are forced to say more and more often that consumers no longer feel the difference between well-known brands and less well-known brands.
This is the border between quality and quality of products. Consumers are asking themselves why they should pay more. The next type of strategy is marketing of innovative solutions based on technologies.
The prerequisite here is the presence of scientific and engineering talents in areas where you can achieve a stable competitive advantage. What is happening here? This is a support for the country's competitive advantages.
This is a high level of education, development of science. Moreover, what is this type of company based on? They have caught the obvious trend of crowd-sourcing.
We can see that gradually India has become a mecca for companies engaged in software.
A successful example is Vipra, the largest provider of software in the world. They have gone from developing cheap software to delivering integrated solutions.
The price is different, and the attitude of the company is different. To understand what this company is, it had market capitalization in 2006 of $21 billion, while the profit was about half a billion.
This is a very serious company.
The next strategy is global leadership. We are very close to the characteristics of the global. What is it? It is a focus.
It is a specific, narrow product category. Specialization that allows you to be the best in terms of performance, leadership in the field of innovation, and the most important thing is understanding of the consumer needs of the next generation.
At the same time, these companies invest in large-scale production. They place production sites all over the world.
A very interesting example is the Hong Kong company Johnson Electric. This company started with the production of small electric motors.
Now they have become the leaders of the global market of small electric motors, and are the fastest growing company in the field of production of general products related to movement.
These are motors, switches, solenoids, and so on. At the same time, the company has production sites all over the world. In particular, this is China, Latin America, the United States, Western Europe, and research centers cover almost the whole world.
This includes Japan, the United States, Israel, and Italy. How did they achieve this? They achieved this by, on the one hand, aggressive organic growth, when you gradually enter the market, but this happens quite quickly.
Plus, they were able to increase the production base, build up competencies, and add specialized food lines, such as precision piezo-ceramic motors.
And again, very high income. In particular, in 2004, their income exceeded $1 billion. At the same time, 67%, or even a little more, was in the market outside the Asian region.
For these companies, I repeat, global large-scale production and developed global logistics are very important.
The next type of strategy is the use of natural resources. Perhaps what is much more clear to us is the path, the prelude to expansion, the presence of cheap resources, but at the same time, high-quality resources.
I will not give you examples of Russian companies, but I will give you an example of a Brazilian company, Sade. This company is one of the largest global manufacturers of chilled and frozen food.
It must be said that the company brings new products to the market every year at a huge rate, on average, about 60 new products per year.
What does this company expect? The basis of their expansion model is to focus on the expansion of production in Brazil. They do not strive to absorb producers from other countries.
Why in Brazil? Because of low production costs, high quality standards, plus vertical integration. Nevertheless, they make investments in international markets, but mainly in distribution and supply chains.
The next type of strategy is the transfer of new business models to the global market. What is supposed to happen here? You have developed a business model that has been tested on the domestic market and successfully. And you are trying to transfer it to the foreign market.
The most curious example is the company Semex, a Mexican cement manufacturer. At the same time, this manufacturer is now the most profitable in the world. In addition to cement, they also produce concrete and various construction mixes.
If we look at the sales volume, in 2006 it exceeded $18 billion. This is a very serious business. The company is present in more than 50 countries around the world.
And the global presence is achieved by merging and absorbing. But what business model did they use on the global market? This is the so-called patrimonio hoy program.
What did the company do? They merged the construction business with the banking business, offering Mexican consumers a very profitable scheme. What do I mean? In general, research has shown that Mexicans are very poor at saving.
In addition, a large part of Mexicans are poor enough and banks simply do not want to provide them with loans. At the same time, a large number of Mexicans build their homes on their own. And, accordingly, cement purchases are largely carried out at a retail price.
What was the company's offer? How did they try to make life easier for Mexicans? In order for an average Mexican to be able to build his own house, the company offered people to join a group of people, something like a mutual aid cashier.
For one invested dollar, you received four dollars in loans, but not in money. You received them in the form of construction mixtures. And thus, you had the opportunity to build the desired home.
At the same time, the company also provided additional opportunities for suppliers to provide consumers with discounts on other building materials. This was an economic opportunity.
In addition, the costs, or rather, the prices for certain materials, were actually frozen for a long period of time. And all this allowed consumers to get what they wanted.
The company successfully tested this approach on the domestic market, and then began to gradually test it on foreign markets. In particular, this program now covers more than 160,000 poor families in Colombia, Nicaragua, Venezuela, and other countries around the world.
The sixth model is access to natural resources. Here, expansion is not only done to gain profits from international markets, but also to gain access to vital resources for your company, resources that you need on the domestic market.
In particular, it is interesting to look at the Shanghai Baosteel Group Corporation, the largest steel manufacturer in China. Now, as you know, China is the fastest growing steel market in the world, and it outperforms even the United States.
The company has the lowest production base in Asia, advanced technologies, and strong operational competences. At the same time, they are looking for ways to stabilize the supply of iron ore on global markets.
For this purpose, they absorb companies operating in this sector. Now, I invite you to think about what opportunities the exit of Russian companies to the international market will be interesting for us.
The first is the use of deep-rooted processing of raw materials with a significant increase in the added cost. You don't have to follow the examples. Take the forest industry. If we take the round forest and take the next stage of processing, you will see that the price difference will be many times greater.
Accordingly, Russian companies that supply raw materials lose money, or do not make enough profit.
The second aspect is the use of state and regional capabilities. Here, you can look for opportunities for construction companies or companies that work in the field of mining.
This is mostly for them, although we see that there are various interstate agreements, including the supply of Russian products to foreign markets.
The next aspect is the use of national advantages at the company level. We have already talked about the Metal Park company, which used our skills and was provided with titanium to achieve success at the foreign market.
The next aspect is the integration into the technological chains of foreign manufacturers. Here is an example of a Nizhny Novgorod company, Instrument, which supplied steering columns for Mercedes.
This is a direct example of how you can integrate into these chains. But what is fundamentally important here? It is important that your company is able to provide high-quality products, and even more important, stable high-quality products.
You need to satisfy the standards set by the manufacturer, into whose technological chain you will be integrated.
The next aspect is the use of advanced technologies. Here, the most curious example is another Russian company, ABC Line Studio, which specializes in the development and creation of virtual tours, panoramic images, and Internet resources.
Not so long ago, in 2005, they launched the Visual Hotels project, which is supposed to create a global Internet resource that will unite the best hotels and hotels in the world in the near future.
What is the purpose of all this? The goal is to provide the end consumer with a very clear, high-quality, visual product that shows the hotel from all points of view.
Now the company is present in the markets of the United Arab Emirates, Turkey, Cyprus. They are about to implement the hotel description in Spain, Thailand, and Egypt. What does the company do?
The global Internet resource is updated with information about the hotels that have joined the project. When we came to the agency, 10 years ago, we saw a high-quality catalog with good photos.
But this did not always give us a good picture. Now we see that some hotels on their websites have so-called virtual tours, where you can look to the right, to the left, and evaluate everything that this hotel offers.
Visual Hotels takes you further. You use all the opportunities available to you. In addition, you are shown the location, the aerial photography. You also have the opportunity to walk along the nearby streets, to evaluate your surroundings to understand where your hotel is.
Sometimes, you don't have enough words. It's better to see it once.
The next opportunity for Russian companies is a co-export. What do I mean by co-export? I mean your opportunities.
I must say that now Russian companies should pay more attention to niche strategies, rather than to the serious market leadership.
What companies have really succeeded here? Basque has succeeded. It produces clothing and equipment for active and extreme sports and recreation.
The geography of the company's activities today is Canada, the United States, Scandinavian countries, India. This is a serious global market.
Why? Because they supply high-quality products at relatively low prices and with a wide range.
But this niche strategy was originally oriented to the top of the pyramid of this market. The fashion is dictated by professional climbers and researchers.
The company, supplying products for various expeditions, has won their trust and now uses all their clothing and equipment. More and more of this can be available to the mass market.
Another option is buying assets abroad. Sometimes, this is done to avoid certain barriers.
For example, Altervest is a Russian ice cream manufacturer. After the international fair Intercool 2002, it received orders from several foreign retailers to supply ice cream.
But the fact is that the EU has prohibitive tariffs on milk-containing products, plus there is a very strict and complex certification system. The markets where they had the opportunity to get access are very rich and interesting.
What did the company do? In 2004, the company acquired a control package from a German company and became the co-owner of an ice cream factory in Poland.
In particular, the German company Altervest was able to conclude an agreement with several German retail chains on the supply of ice cream, but only to retail brands.
Before we move on to the next question, I would like you to answer the question, what strategy do you think is the most optimal for your company, based on your experience and the opportunities we have just discussed?